hello Community let's have a look what
happened in eii just last week something
really nice and I want this to be for
everybody for beginner for experts we
have here our large language mall and
you know we have the pre-training the
superb fine tuning the DPO alignment and
then we have a simple query and model
answers and we have here the Lama model
the anthropic models and our jet GPD for
Omni and ansers are generated in
milliseconds in the inference run but
last week we focused on another kind of
L language model and there is here we
have here an inference compute or test
time compute and you know the modes this
is the open AI 01 the O3 the Deep seek
R1 and the new Gemini 2.0 the thinking
models where we have
explicit thinking time that takes 2 to 5
minutes so we divide now this in a pure
training time compute
optimization and then a test time
compute optimization and you might ask
why why do we need this well it all
depends here of course on the query if I
have a very specific query then the
model here in the first place here a
llama model for example just generate an
answer that's the model learned this is
it but if I have a real complex query
now in the second kind of llm with the
inference compute I can give now the
model time to think about my query learn
something new and yeah it is not just a
rag system that it retrieves from a
database no no we are going here and
Next Step level because what we're going
to do also here now we have an inference
supervised fine tuning and inferenced
reinforcement learning happening now in
this phase because given my specific
variant we here about reasoning causal
reasoning logic and everything we have
now the chance here to further learn and
fine-tune and align here the model for
this particular query so we have a
better performance and just to show you
just 8 days ago I had this video here
about the test time preference
optimization and you say hey this is
exactly what we have here on the normal
training time of optimization now we go
from DPO to the TPO the test time
preference optimization and if you want
to see how we perform here the latest
nii research here on reinforcement
learning this is the video for
you so in general we can say the second
type of reasoning llms they have here
the goal of advanced reasoning
performance either in mathematic in
logic in finance whatever you're looking
for and I showed you here 7 days ago
here that I examined here the 03 mini
High model by open ey and I was really
Amazed by the reasoning
capabilities but right the next day I
did this video about how stupid and 01
model is and I focused here on the R1
because this is open source and we could
have a look at the reasoning process but
the same is true for the 01 kind of
models now if we try to understand it is
rather easy if the model tries to find
your solution it tries you different PA
phrs in the reasoning process but as you
can see this depth here of the reasoning
argumentation is rather limited as it
turns out and this is why I called the
video stupid they were trained here to
find a multitude of possible solution
but they were not trained to go here
really for a deep reasoning spent here
really quite a lot amount of time here
into not discovering 100 possible
solution but go in depth with the second
solution and find the correct solution
so we had here that inadequate depth of
reasoning happening and this was here
the content of the video and the
research team showed us that this 01
models they are not at their maximum
performance there is something to gain
well yeah open had the O3 model what a
coincidence but in this video I showed
you there's a lack of explicit reward
here for the depth exploration and the
reasoning so models like o1 optimized
for The Final Answer correctness but not
for the reasoning efficiency or the path
coherence and this creates here a
disconnect the model knows what to solve
but he does not know how to structure
the solution in an optimal way this was
the inside of this video because as we
noticed here in the tests there's an
abandonment of the correct solution real
early in the phase because the simp the
model simply failed to understand that
it is on the correct
track I showed you a solution by the
authors of a research paper called tip
where they simply recalibrate the model
reasoning process great and then after
R1 next day I did a video on the new
Stanford S1 large language model that is
also a reasoning model and I showed you
the plus and the minus of the Stanford
model and we went into the process of
creating this and I showed you here in
this very simple situation uh
visualization here we have for example a
data set a mathematical data set and now
the elegant Solution by Stanford
University was to use here 59,000
different training examples and Stanford
used Gemini 2.0 is sinking here to
extract here the correct mathematical
reasoning traces for the mathematical
solution and then Stanford said okay and
now from all of this close to 60,000
solution we only take 1,000 because only
the best the most beautiful the most
efficiently solved the most gorgeous
solution and they showed that even with
a data set of onek size if the quality
is really high you don't need 60,000
data sets for your training if you have
a high quality 1,000 is absolutely
enough so they took this 1K data set on
mathematical reasoning and simply took
here a model here from China the q1 2.5
32b instruct llm and supervised fine
tune this Chinese model on this
particular data set they extracted with
Gemini 2.0 is sinking and then this
supervised fine tune model they call now
Stanford 1 isn't this beautiful for the
time I told you just took about here the
supervis fine tuning 26 minutes here on
16 h100 Nvidia gpus and the beauty was
Stanford could use here utilize the open
source Q 2.5 instruct so the training
time computer of S1 was beautiful but
Stanford had another idea
Stanford thought hey if I want to
optimize here a test time compute
because I have all these beautiful
reasoning paths from Gemini 2.0 syncing
I have here now for the algorithm side
also a brand new idea and Stanford rent
here with twostep idea they say hey I
just count the internal thinking token
here of S1 and I Define a threshold 100
token 500 token 10,000 token whatever is
adequate and a have a end of thinking a
token delimiter and then whenever the
system reaches your end of thinking I
tell the system hey wherever you are in
your reasoning process tell me now the
answer the final answer
is and this was beautiful because it
kept here the llm from running crazy
here for some incorrect Solutions
however when there was a complex
solution there was also that Stanford
said hey we introduce now the weight
token for the model reasoning Trace to
encourage you more
exploration so you see beautiful idea
optimize the data and optimize here the
algorithm and now I showed you what is
the effect of both systems now we have
here in the video I give you a detail
explanation the q1 2.5 and if you take
whatever test here let's say
26.7% and then we take the S1 model now
with the Google Gemini improved
reasoning without here the if you would
like to call it here this Advanced
reasoning and I jump into performance
Almost 100% look I go from 26% to
50% and then if I activate this
algorithm test time computer
optimization I just go up 6.7 percentage
points if I have an other Benchmark you
see I just go up from
92.6 to 9 3.0 so 0.4 percentage point if
I activate here the test time computer
so I think we can clearly see the
quality of the supervised fine-tuning
data is the most important dominant
Factor so the quality of the data set
was simply amazing with Stanford
S1 so you see two videos on this kind of
thing and then I did the right the next
video here and I showed you limitting or
the llms at their breaking point and I
looked here at a very specific case I
asked hey when do I have to move my for
my entropic model for my llama models
for my J gbd4 Omni when do I have to
move to these reasoning models that are
maybe more expensive or in the case of
R1 open source which is beautiful so
when to move or and I also explored this
in the next video when should should I
just increase here the model size so go
from a llama 8B to a llama
45b is there a limit in the intelligence
is there a limit here in the performance
that I can achieve well what if I let a
llama model Run for the same task 50
times and then I just have a majority
voting can I come close to open
ai1 and this was the content of my next
video and we looked here in detail here
to want of this question and since this
is just a weekly update just want to
tell you we had a beautiful idea to have
two new complexity measures and one we
go we went here with the combinatorial
search space that is theoretically
available and we looked here at the
search space
size plus and this was the real Beauty
the authors of this study showed us that
there's a simple Sabra logic and if we
have here the set three conflict count
that this captures beautifully The
Logical difficulty for particular
complex a problem complexities so we had
here two if you want metrics for the
complexity of the task of my query and
then we had all the tools that we need
to evaluate the performance and I told
you do not make this mistake if you see
here an overall performance indicator
because look here we have here in the
the
first part we have all our reasoning
llms no the o1 the R1 the o1 mini and
they have here great overall performance
but this is here an average and then you
have your Claud Sonet 3.5 your llama 3.1
45 billion your gbd4 Omni and so on and
I told you don't look at this look at
the complexity of the task and we went
here for a small complexity where we
only had a logical grid of 2 * 2 or 3 *
3 and I showed you look here the
classical llms they perform not so bad
compared but the moment you move from a
2.2 complexity to a 3.4
complexity those non reasoning models
they fall apart they simply break they
are not able to do a logical reasoning
anymore of course not but our reasoning
llms our o1 our R1 our
O3 they keep the
performance and I explained in the video
why the other question that we answered
is hey if I just scale up my non-
reasoning model look this here is a
llama 3.2 this is a 3 billion this is an
8 billion this is a 70 billion and this
is a 405 billion yes if you take one
complexity matric one complexity
indicator like the search space size
let's say here at this particular we
have here from the 3B and the 8B a
performance accuracy of zero maybe we
have here 10% accuracy from the 70b and
the
45b is somewhere a little bit at 21%
accuracy so for a certain small search
space yes it makes sense that you
upgrade here from a 3B 8B 70b to a 400b
but look this is converging to Zero
Performance real fast if you have more
complex
tasks and we looked at the scaling gen
of Sword tokens that are happening in
the hidden reasoning process and we
discovered the non- reasoning models
they have no chance at all because now
if you look at the second complexity
metric of the set three conflicts that I
explained in my video in detail you saw
look this is the performance this is
close to 0%
immediately and then we had a look at
the 01 mini the 01 preview the R1 in
Orange and then the o01 here in blue and
the 03 mini high would be real similar
here to the 01 performance so we
understood here okay this is it if we
scale up here to token the reasoning
tokens for the complexity so we
understand when to switch and ship here
and move over to the reasoning
Alps but if we look at this you
understand that this is just the
language model and some people call this
the plain large language model and some
people call this the reasoning llm or I
have seen here an inference llm whatever
you like to call it it is just an llm
but you know if we add now here A Memory
a function calling we can build an agent
and we can build an agent here from a
simple llm and we can build an agent
from a reasoning llm and you can call
this agent maybe a reasoning agent but I
just call it an
agent when my next video the real the
next day we went now and we jumped from
an llm performance to the agent
performance and in this video about
qet we had a simple goal in the video we
wanted to build more intelligent EI
agents that are able to solve more
complex interactive task so this means
if this agent goes on on the internet
with your credit card shopping for you
you wanted the interactivity here
wherever the agent will go in the
internet that this is performing and
doing a great job and we looked here in
particular at the optimization of a
process reward model in
inference so we had here this new idea
of Q L or a a quality guided language
agent stepwise search implementation and
we found this is perfect to increase the
performance in complex interactive task
like you go shopping or you do some deep
research with this and we had a look at
this and I give you this visualization
in my video and I explained exactly what
we are doing and we found out that there
is a benefit because normally in our
reinforcement learning in our reward
function especially in our quality
values nor normally the system would run
here through the complete until it
generates a final answer and then we
have a final reward signal at the end of
the sying process and this I told youy
it's like your final exam at the end of
a semester now you don't really know
what you learned during all these
months and we found out here in this
video that with the help of a monal tree
search we could build some trees and
those three would be really helpful if
we do not rely on a final reward signal
but early on we calculate the reward
much more
earlier and here I showed you that the
Stanford model the S1 model the
reasoning model had a very simple idea
because what it did in fact was just to
say at certain times hey stop now tell
me the result or tell me the result and
you could then argue hey maybe I already
reached here the right result or maybe
here everything is in red and if I have
everything ing in red seven steps in red
maybe there's a lower chance that
suddenly out of the blue I will find a
correct solution so we looked at this I
explained this to you in detail and then
here from this qet idea I told you we
now combine something beautiful so we
build our trees with the Monte Caro
treesearch algorithm but we also have
now a process reward model and the
beauty of this process reward model is
that now at each step we have an
estimated reward function so we have a Q
value a q score that tells here exactly
the agent hey obious three option I
calculated here your future reward your
future discounted reward given my own
training process and I would recommend
you click here on this link in the web
page if you want for example to purchase
something here on the internet and you
send of your AI agent to perform here
this
buy now we went in detail into the
Bellman equation here as a tool that
istill here the sparse outcome rewards
into another class that we needed a
dense stepwise quality value and this
opened up here the gate here for the qet
and I showed you how we can train the ca
this is simply a new network that laws
to predict to predict this distill
quality values and this is what pushed
us further to a better performance so we
did this during the inference time
search and qet our little companion to
the agent combined now guidance for the
action selection by the AI agent at each
single step during the inference process
so you see we had an agent and we had a
quality Network also a Transformer
Network that was providing here guidance
to our agents so if you want we had two
agent working on the same
topic and wasn't this beautiful and then
in my next video I want to go into the
real world AI product and I said okay so
if we have now the perfect EI agent
quotation mark let's have a look of the
performance of a perfect EI agent and
let's use here science as the sector
that we examine
this and in my next video I showed you
here a product demo on the homepage from
openi where they introduce you to the
scientific deep research agent and I
just looked at their product am by open
ey and I yeah I went in detail into
whatever went wrong with this a gentic
implementation
here and I told you there's a be
beautiful side also because right the
next day here hugging face decided to
rebuild this deep research agent as an
Open Source by the open source community
and if you want you have there the link
also to the GitHub and you can see that
this is almost ready and finished right
now as we speak and day here also showed
here to implement here an optimized
process reward model so we don't have
have to wait for the final reward signal
but we can do this at each action that
the agent is performing now on the
internet in the wild performing the
action that you want so my next video I
said okay great so we have now here one
eii agent that simply fails on the given
task because the complexity is too high
for this single agent by this product
here by openi and then I ask you hey so
what we do now what is the next logical
step should we increase the complexity
maybe not such a good idea or should we
go for Pure EI automation should we just
let the system run I don't know like
crazy should we go for a deep research
agent pass at 32 so we let the Deep
research Aiden do the same task 32 times
and then we just have a majority vote by
another agent that says hey this looks
like this is the best result here by
this particular agent so we would have
to pay 33 times here for for the Deep
research agent and then we had a
beautiful
idea we went from a single agent to a
multi-agent
solution and we said for the next video
let's go one step further let's build
not just agents but specialized agent
for specific task and then then we have
a beautiful task because then we have
multiple options to configure our
multi-agent system with our specialized
agents so whatever is the input output
of One agent to the other to the next
agent we have options how to configure
here multi-agent system given we have
here oh specialized agents sorry
topics and this was then the task for my
next video and we went here and we went
with an automatization technology that
you know here DSP here and we went to
extend it to a topology DSP so we went
from a single agent to a multi-agent
configuration system and we applied the
normal DSP the topology dpy and then I
showed you that we can see this here as
a pure mathematical optimization
problem and I told you yes we had a
video months ago where I showed you here
with addas there was this beautiful
publication that EI agent can design
themsel but given that we have multi I
agents for real complex reasoning task
we needed a more advanced mathematical
optimization theorem and I told you here
in this video about topology DSP
prompting the swarm with multi-agents I
said imagine if you could Define the
complete complexity of a system in a
pure mathematical optimization problem
and I explained why this is the solution
to
this so what we ended up with was with a
three part process we found out detail
in the video that The Prompt
optimization was essential as a first
step then the second step was a
multi-agent design a topology Optimizer
of all the different specialized agent
that we developed and then the third
step was with an optimized topology
configuration again do a prompt
optimization and I showed you for
different task we were able to find with
DSP and topology DSP here the perfect
multi-agent topology to solve those
Benchmark task and you see here for this
particular task of mathematical
reasoning we found out that this
particular configuration here with
aggregate reflect and debate agent with
a particular number of iteration they
performed here their
best we came to the conclusion of the
video and I explained it over there that
the performance variation across
different topologies of our special
specialized agent underscore the
importance of the topology
selection we have to build our
multi-agent framework in particular ways
you just cannot put multiple agent
together and saying yeah it doesn't
matter how we build them it is really
important that you build it in the
optimal way so influential topologies
And We examined this a little bit detail
but what I finished and what I think was
really important to show you that the
first stop of the optimization with the
prompt had the most significant effect
to the overall system
performance and there we are this is now
here the last video from
yesterday and I hope I've showed you why
I built my videos how I select my topics
for my videos and I think yep it was a
beautiful week so I tried to give you
here an umbrella View and overview of
the complexity if you don't follow here
in detail here my single videos never
mind with this video I just wanted to
give you here the 10,000 M view that you
understand what is going on in AI in the
last days in the last week what you
should be aware of where is AI research
heading for what are the problems we are
absolutely not able to solve yet and
where we find solution that are just
beautiful to explore
if you like this kind of video hey why
not subscribe and maybe next week yeah
we do another AI just happened